\input texinfo @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@documentencoding UTF-8
@setfilename movim-core.info
@settitle Movim-core
@setchapternewpage on
@c %**end of header

@set VERSION 0.1
@set UPDATED 19 February 2011

@copying
This manual documents Movim-Core (version @value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}).

Copyright @copyright{} 2009-2011 Movim-Core project.
@sp 1
@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.2
or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover
Texts.  A copy of the license is included in the section entitled ``GNU
Free Documentation License''.
@end quotation
@end copying

@titlepage
@title MOVIM-CORE
@subtitle version @value{VERSION}, @value{UPDATED}
@vskip 4cm
@author Guillaume Pasquet, Timothée Jaussoin
@c Copyright page
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage


@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top MOVIM-CORE

This is Movim-core @value{VERSION}'s manual.
@end ifnottex

@menu
* foreword:: What this document is all about
* introduction:: What is Movim-core and how to use this document
* structure:: A description of Movim-core's internals
* API:: Documentation of the widget's API
@end menu

@node foreword
@chapter Foreword
Movim-core is an XMPP communication platform. It is extensible and uses a
widget-based system for the user interface. Please note that this is not
designed to be used directly by an end-user.

This document describes the principles on which Movim-core is built and the
necessary knowledge to implement new widgets.

@node introduction
@chapter Introduction
Movim-core is designed to ease the implementation of XMPP web-based clients,
using massively asynchronous javascript and abstracting XMPP calls into an
events-based API.

The widgets API doesn't only provide the necessary abstraction and framework to
communicate through XMPP, it also features a javascript abstration system that
lets you write as little javascript as possible. Moreover, widgets can embed
their own resources --- pictures, css, javascript.

@section Requirements
Movim-core is a web framework written in PHP. To run it, you need the following
software:

@itemize @bullet
@item
PHP5.3 or greater with the Curl library.
@item
A web server: apache, lighttpd etc. (Note that weird web servers like IIS
haven't been tested.)
@end itemize

@section Getting Movim-core
Movim-core may be downloaded from @url{http://www.movim.eu}.

Note that if you like risks, you may also check out the latest development
version at @url{http://gitorious.org/movim}.

@section Installing Movim
After downloading the Movim-core archive, simply extract it somewhere in your
web server's root directory, and off you go.

@section Helping out
Movim-core is Free software under the AGPL license. You can check out the latest
code at @url{http://gitorious.org/movim}. Feel free to send in merge requests if
you want to lend a hand.

You can also help by reporting new bugs or proposing new ideas.

@node structure
@chapter Internal structure
Understanding Movim-core's internals isn't necessary to use it. However, it may
help finding out problems and developing more efficiently.

Movim-core is consists of a widgets system and an XMPP abstration that
communicate together through an asynchronous event handler. This is all
triggered by a controller, which is loaded depending on the page you visit.

@section XMPP connection
The XMPP connection is managed by the JAXL library. It abstracts the raw sending
and reception of XML documents. Each message is handled and seen as events from
the widgets point of view.

Each loaded widget declares its event handlers for different types of
events. These are triggered when the pertaining event comes through.

@section Controller
The controller's job is to bootstrap the other systems. It doesn't do much all
by itself.

@section Widgets
Widgets are small pieces of software that plug into Movim-core to provide extra
ability to the system. These are mostly graphical, and generate ajax code
automatically.

Movim-core comes with several widgets. These sit in the @file{lib/widgets}
directory. User-defined widgets should be in the @file{widgets} directory. Note
that user-defined widgets always shadow the system widgets.

Widgets can declare ajax functions and XMPP event handlers in order to interact
with their GUI part and the XMPP subsystem. @xref{widget-api} for more
information.

@node widget-api
@chapter Widget API
Widgets inherit from the @emph{Widget} base class. The base class automagically
generates ajax calls and javascript functions for you.

The basic template of a Movim widget is as follows:

@cartouche
@verbatim
class Widget extends Widget
{
    function WidgetLoad()
    {
        $this->registerEvent('incomemessage', 'onIncomingMessage');
    }

    function onIncomingMessage($data)
    {
        $this->sendto('movim_prepend', array(
                                       'chatMessages',
                                       $data['message'],
                                       ));
    }

    function build()
    {
        ?>
        <div id="chatMessages">
        </div>
        <?
    }
}
@end verbatim
@end cartouche

Note that the constructor is not reimplemented. Instead the parent class
provides a @code{WidgetLoad()} function that is called right at the end of the
standard constructor.

Event handlers must be defined into @code{WidgetLoad()}.

The @code{build()} function is called when the widget is being written onto the
interface. That's typically where you should put your HTML code.


@section Events
XMPP triggers many different kinds of events that are run against all the loaded
widgets. In order to process an event, you may register one or more handlers in
your widget.

@subsection Handling events
A widget handler is a public method that only takes one parameter:
@code{$data}, which usually is an array that contains the data returned by the
XMPP server.

Your handlers must be registered in @code{WidgetLoad()} using the method:

@cartouche
@verbatim
Widget::registerEvent($eventType, $handler)
@end verbatim
@end cartouche

@code{$handler} is a the name of the method as a string, and @code{$eventType}
is the name of the event as a string.

@subsection Event types
The XMPP subsystem raises the following events:

@table @code
@item postdisconnect
      Event that is triggered immediately after the account has been
      disconnected on the user's request.
@item incomingemptybody
      A message that comes in without body. This is typically a presence ping.
@item vcardreceived
      The user's vcard was received. @code{$data} contains the vcard as a base64
      encoded string.
@item rosterreceived
      The roster's list was received. @code{$data} is an array of groups and
      users.
@item incomeactive
      The contact is currently looking at his message list.
@item incomecomposing
      The contact is writing a message.
@item incomemessage
      A new message was received (contained in @code{$data}).
@item incomeoffline
      A contact as gone offline.
@item incomeaway
      A contact is now marked as away.
@item incomednd
      A contact is now marked as @emph{do not disturb}.
@item incomeonline
      A contact is now online.
@end table

@node sendto
@subsection Sending messages to JS
Widgets are split in two parts. One is the GUI-javascript part, the other is the
PHP script. Both communicate asynchronously. The GUI part can send data to the
PHP part through AJAX calls (@xref{ajaxcalls}), and event handler can also send
messages to their GUI counterpart through Movim-core's long polling.

This is achieved by calling the method:

@cartouche
@verbatim
Widget::sendto($callback, array $parameters);
@end verbatim
@end cartouche

The principle is very simple, @code{sendto()} sends an XMLRPC call to the GUI
part that runs the specified @code{$callback} function with the provided
@code{$parameters} that are ordered as appropriated.

Additionally, binary data should be base64 encoded and wrapped in a CDATA
container. To simplify the matter, the method @code{Widget::cdata()} is
provided.

@node js-callbacks
@subsection Standard javascript callbacks
You may define your own javascript callback functions and use them as
appropriate. Alternatively, Movim-core comes with a standard set of javascript
callbacks that allow simple operations on HTML elements (picked up by ID).

@table @code
@item movim_append(target, string)
      Appends @code{string} to the html element with ID @code{target}.
@item movim_prepend(target, string)
      Prepends @code{string} to the html element with ID @code{target}.
@item movim_fill(target, string)
      Fills @code{string} to the html element with ID @code{target}.
@item movim_drop()
      Doesn't do anything.
@end table

@node ajaxcalls
@subsection Ajax calls
Any method defined in your widget that starts with @code{ajax} will have a
javascript ajax call automatically generated.

This ajax call can be explicitely called upon with the method:

@cartouche
@verbatim
Widget::callAjax($funcname, $callback, $target, ...)
@end verbatim
@end cartouche

@code{$funcname} is the name of the ajax function. @code{$callback} is the name
of the javascript callback to handle the return, @code{$target} is the ID of the
element in which to apply the return.

Note that you can pass an arbitrary number of arguments, the extra arguments are
mapped to those of the ajax function. Here is an example:

@cartouche
@verbatim
class MyWidget extends Widget
{
    function ajaxTest($param1, $param2)
    {
        ...
    }

    function build()
    {
       ?>
       <div id="test"></div>
       <input type="button"
              onclick="<? $this->callAjax(
                           'ajaxTest',
                           'movim_fill',
                           "'test'",
                           '1',
                           '2'
                           );?>"/>
       <?
    }
}
@end verbatim
@end cartouche

Note that strings that needs to be passed to javascript must be double-quoted.

@node widget-resource
@subsection Widget resource
Widgets can come along with their own resources, in particular their CSS and
javascript.

The @code{Widget} base class includes two methods to ease the integration of
custom javascript and css:

@cartouche
@verbatim
Widget::addjs($jsfile)
Widget::addcss($cssfile)
@end verbatim
@end cartouche

The file paths given to these functions are relative to the widget's directory.

@node license
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter GNU Free Documentation License
@include fdl-1.2.texi

@bye
